---
layout: post
title: "English and me"
modified:
categories: blog
excerpt:
tags: [English]
image:
  feature:
date: 2015-04-27
---

I like English. I mean the language, (although I have no ill feeling towards English people.)

English has been the first and the only foreign language that I have learned and used. My first encounter with the language was before the school age, when a BBC TV series called "Follow Me!" became popular in China during 1980s.

Back then, the country's education system had just started to recover from the devastation of the decade-long Cultural Revolution, and English, the language of major "Western imperialist powers", had replaced Russian to become the official foreign language mandated by the national curriculum. Outside school, learning English was also embraced as a critical path to catch up with the world, when the People's Republic had finally broke free from the endless political and social turmoil since its inception. Before long, everyone was learning, or talking about learning, English.

The national TV channel, CCTV (China Central Television), caught the wave to import the programme, and soon it became a hit and won millions of loyal audiences, among whom my two sisters, who were in year 8 at that time. At dinner time, when the show was on, the whole family would sit in front of the 12-inch black-and-white TV screen and watch it intensively. My sisters would follow the hosts to repeat basic yet useful phrases and sentences, such as greeting people or asking directions. I was too young to remember anything useful. What I did remember was how every episode started with a scene of a jumbo jet touching down at the Heathrow Airport and the two hosts appearing on screen to greet the audience in their elegant London, and Beijing (one of them spoke Mandarin), accent. To me, and to many others as I figured, the show was more than just a language course. It opened a small window to an interesting new world, to which the language called English is the path.

Back in those days when my sisters and I were at school, English was not taught until junior high. The focus was mostly on vocabulary and grammar, not much on reading and writing, and nearly zero on speaking. In fact, the classroom teaching was far less interesting than that of the "Follow Me!" series. Most teachers didn't have experience using the language themselves, and they all had bad pronunciations. But that didn't affect their determination to instil the language into students' mind, and they did it through the same methods that they applied to teaching any other subjects - a lot of emphasis on getting students to memorise stuff by force. To some extent, it makes sense, at least when it comes to grammar rules; but still, learning a language entails using it in real life conversations, reading it in books, and writing it in letters. That was something most Chinese students at that time didn't have a chance to do. As a result, in students' mind, English was probably a terrible subject to learn - arcane rules that are hard to remember and of no practical use.

Of practical use or not, it soon became clear. In fact, it's of great importance to one's academic endeavour - English has been one of the main subjects in the national university admission exam, or Gaokao, through which someone's life path can be fundamentally changed in a country where a person's social status is predominantly determined by the level of education he or she receives. For an even more ambitious heart that dreams of studying abroad, English is undoubtedly a crucial skill to grasp.

When I started in the university, there was a popular understanding among students that doing well in your academic concentration would not necessarily help with a better future, but mastering English would. (Another skill that was thought to have this magical power was computer literacy.) That belief in the importance of English skills was shared by policy makers too - for undergraduate students to get their degrees, they had to pass at least the band 4 of a national English test called the College English Test, or CET-4. That was not a trivial task for most students. I usually did well at school but it was still causing a high level of anxiety for me, like it did for almost everyone. To sharpen my ears, almost every night, I would fall in sleep with a shortwave radio tuned in to the BBC World News or the Voice of America Special English programme. I dreamed of rewiring my brain into the "English mode." I think it helped - I ended up passing CET-4 at the highest score in my university, for which I won a 100-yuan cash reward that was presented at the group morning exercise gathering by a faculty member.

I have never let go the "momentum" since then. After CET-4, I also passed CET-6 with a fairly good score as well, even though it's not required to get my degree. By then, I had moved on from Special English to the normal programmes of BBC and VOA, and had started reading my first English novel, *The Red and the Black* by Stendhal. (It was translated into English from French of course.) Being able to use English outside the classroom for the first time gave me the hope that one day I may stumble into a new world that was previously inaccessible. Just thinking about how many new books I would be able to read excited me. Looking back, I think it was then that I really started to see the benefit of learning English.

Despite my good performance at school, and my bachelor's degree, (thanks to my passing of CET-4,) I found it hard to land a good job in my discipline, which was mechanical engineering; therefore, I moved to the IT industry after graduation. (English skills and computer literacy - indeed, they both helped me.) As a programer, I needed to read English documentations, and I also needed to write work emails in English after joining an American company. My day-to-day exposure to English was limited, so I still resorted to my old friends, shortwave radio and novels, and a new friend, the American situation comedy, *Friends*.

It was when I was working for the American company that I started thinking about going overseas. I felt like I was standing on the seashore gazing into a wonderful land from afar across the vast ocean, (sometimes with Antonín Dvořák's *New World Symphony* resonating in my ears.) "I have to check out ‘the new world', and English is my ticket." That was my thought.

Not a cheap ticket though.

At that time I had no idea about all those different options of immigration, and I didn't even know which part of "the new world" to check out first. What I did know was that studying overseas is one way to go, and to do that, at the very least, I need to sit for the GRE and TOEFL test. Historically, I was good at exams, but as prudent as I have always been, I chose to do what everyone else was doing in this case, to enrol to the famous New Oriental School. About the school, the anecdote goes like this: almost all Chinese students studying in Ivy League schools have been trained by it, and no one can beat Chinese in achieving the highest scores in those tests, thanks to its extremely targeted, 100% "results-driven" teaching methods. Now a NYSE listed company of over 4 billion USD market value, back then it was already very successful in helping tens of thousands of Chinese people get their English "tickets", at an affordable yet not cheap price. I forgot exactly how much I had paid for the training, but I think it's around 6,000 CNY (about 1,000 AUD) for classes for GRE, TOEFL and IELTS. (Yes, I did them all.) It's not easy to tell the essence of the New Oriental School's secrets in its success, but as a former student, I think it's mostly the combination of the relentless analysis of the test system itself and the instilling of its unyielding belief in "self-fulfilment through hard work" into the mind of its students. I don't think I am in a position to judge its true value, or even "integrity" as some may bring about. I have been through it; it has had some influence on me; it became part of my stories about English.

I got my ticket, a pretty good one, to the most amazing destination I could think of. In that morning when I woke up early from a night of unrestful sleep, the landmass of the great southern continent appearing outside the aircraft window for the first time, I was telling myself, "this is it. A new home, a new life, a new language."

The new language wasn't easy in my new home. The moment I opened my mouth, I became an unborn baby again. My mouth and ears have been "calibrated" to working with accurate and clear BBC and VOA news English; they didn't know where they were once bombarded with all those idiomatic and vivid daily conversations. Years later, I am probably a "toddler" now. Still stumbling on day-to-day small talks or some complicated topics from time to time, but at least when that happened, I have learned to take a deep breath, and guess, and ask, and use whatever vocabulary and expressions I happen to know, to trudge along. When it comes to work, (I am a software QA engineer,) it's yet another challenge. At work, I need to not just be able to communicate effectively, sometimes also artfully. It's not too much an issue with written communications, but it's extremely stressful in a face-to-face conversation. That's by far the only thing that I don't like about my work.

I guess it will be like that forever. One thing about being an adult immigrant is that, you are adapting to some fundamental changes, the new language being the most crucial one, not at the best stage of your life to learn new things. Your mother tone has been baked into your brain since infancy, yet the language of your adopted home will have to fight for a space as well. With all the "technical" aspects of the new language, also come the subtle cultural and customary matters, or different ways of thinking. At no time before have I sensed more about those differences and their importance in truly grasping the new language. Sometimes it's discouraging to realise the very nature of the challenge, yet at other times it's also immensely fulfilling to know that you are charging into a new frontier, treading the trail of numerous early comers from a time when it was still free to travel to any corner of the seas, mostly by boat.

So, here I am, using the old ABC I learned decades ago, to tell a new story, about English.

It is still continuing.
