---
layout: post
title: "Insider's Knowledge"
modified:
categories: blog
excerpt: "My recently experience learning how things work in China, the Chinese way"
tags: [China]
image:
feature:
date: 2016-06-19
---

A friend of mine mentioned that her banker made a major mistake crunching the numbers for her home loan. It didn't occur to her to check the calculation until the mistake became too obvious to be overlooked. Now in hindsight I wonder if my own loan broker had got the numbers right for me, because I was like that friend who usually doesn't give a second thought about a professional's work. You rightfully think you are in good hands since you paid for the service, only to find out that you still need to acquire a lot of those "professional knowledge" yourself to make sure everything is in order. This is especially true in China, and I have experienced it firsthand.

The past a few weeks have been testing. It's usually my sister who takes care of the "people business" by which I mean talking to government clerks in charge of reimbursing us Dad's medical expense, or liaising with real estate agents to rent an apartment. But now it's on my shoulder. In my home country this is not an issue, because information about how things work are easily accessible and well understood. I only need to check out a government agency's website and everything is clearly stated there. Very often, many transactions can also be done online. But now in China, you don't have a clue. It's not like I got disconnected to the local social environment after being absent for these years. It's always been like that. People seem to tend to obscure the "rules" deliberately and expect individuals to learn the "insider's knowledge" by themselves, in their own way.

It's almost a lifelong endeavour, because things are constantly changing in China you know, so the knowledge you have obtained before is rapidly becoming obsolete.

My sister has learned a lot of shocking facts recently when researching on how to sell or buy a property. One example: In other countries that we know, basically you apply for a loan, hire a conveyancer, shop around for the house, pay the deposit and sign the contract, When the settlement date comes, the solicitor takes care of all the money and legal stuff and you just wait to pick up the keys. While here, there is no conveyancing service. You apply for the loan. The bank tells you they can lend you the money (but crucially, no guarantee here that they *will* lend you the money eventually.) Then you find the house you like, you pay the deposit *and* the 20% to 30% down payment, and then the bank changes their mind and you don't get the loan, and **you lose your 20% to 30% down payment!** Losing the deposit is expected in the case but losing the down payment as well is horrifying. That's literally the lifetime savings for many. There are indeed some unlucky folks who got bitten by this. In one case, the guy got some further "insider's knowledge" to find a connection who has the special access to the government database and somehow "averted the crisis". For others, it's simply a disaster.

And the most important thing is, there is no official channel that you can learn about these if you don't have a connection who already knows them. The more you research, the more "enlightening" secrets you will find. Of course, statistically, most people don't get caught up in these unlucky circumstances, but the fact that it's possible to happen still indicates that the system isn't quite right.

Thursday I went to a government office to apply for a specific procedure to validate that we indeed own our apartment so that we are cleared to sell it in the future. It's something like a title search but the potential vendor is required to do it themselves prior to entering a contract. The staff took my "land certificate" and found that the official address of the property has changed in their database - the numerical "1" is now written as the Chinese character for "one" - so my "land certificate" has become invalid and needs to be replaced before they can do anything else. I got a number ticket and joined another 300 or so customers to wait for my turn to update the certificate. It's a massive hall with limited seatings. I waited for about 3 hours and finally, 10 minutes before they close, I got my turn. The girl was quite helpful (despite that she had just dealt with hundreds of customers for that day.) She noticed that before they can update my certificate, I still need to certify my passport first. She tried her best to explain to me where I should go and what I should bring along next time, and that's the achievement of the day for me - I think I finally understand how things work for this specific task, at a price of waiting for about 3 hours without a seat. The thing is, you won't get to know this without going through this process in person. Again, this kind of "insider's knowledge" is nowhere to be found on their website or through other channels (that I can think of.) I wasn't exactly disheartened though, especially when I realised that it's unavoidable, and it's pretty much the same for anybody else. At least I am one step closer to finishing my task. As for how many steps more, I will worry about that later. :-)

If [Siri](http://www.apple.com/ios/siri) is smart enough, next time I should ask her first. Hopefully she is an insider!
